[WHOOSH]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[BACKGROUND MUSIC]
>>BEN FUCHS: When you are
spiritually disconnected
or mentally not thinking
the right thought,
it shows up physically.
Throughout evolution,
the human body
has evolved a system for
destroying the enemy.
Our lifestyles are such that
it leads the immune system
to sometimes act like a rogue.
One of the best
medications is meditation,
and they call it
mindfulness sometimes.
Meditation's a type
of mindfulness.
When your skin gets
exposed to the sun,
the photons get
turned into electrons,
which get turned into
biochemistry to run your body.
The sun doesn't just
contact our skin.
It contacts our eyes.
And by its relationship
to the eyes,
by its interaction
with the eyes,
it communicates to our
brain to make us happy.
Everything just wants
to be appreciated,
and that's what
mindfulness is, and that's
what meditation is,
appreciating you.
>>GEORGE NOORY: Welcome
to "Beyond Belief."
We are going to increase
your immune system
with pharmacist Ben Fuchs
from criticalhealthnews.com.
Pharmacist Ben,
thanks for joining us.
>>FUCHS: Thanks for having me.
>>NOORY: You are a legend.
>>FUCHS: [LAUGHS]
You're a legend, George.
>>NOORY: You know it?
>>FUCHS: I'm just a pharmacist.
>>NOORY: How did you
get into pharmacy?
>>FUCHS: I love chemistry.
When I was a kid, I was
one of those guys that
had a little chemistry set.
And I was always
fascinated by chemistry.
>>NOORY: I had one too.
>>FUCHS: Wasn't that cool?
Yeah, mixing and matching.
But then I got into nutrition.
And I was always blown
away by how nutrients
could change the body and
how our bodies are made up
of what we eat.
You know, how does the
lunch we had yesterday
turn into our hand?
There's this miracle
that occurs between what
we put inside our body and
what shows up on our bodies.
And I was completely
floored by that.
It blew me away.
So I started studying nutrition.
I went to pharmacy
school because I thought,
believe it or not,
that pharmacists
would be the go-to people
for understanding how
to use nutrients as medicines.
And then when I went
to pharmacy school,
I found out that's not at all--
>>NOORY: They didn't teach that.
>>FUCHS: That's not at
all what they do, no.
>>NOORY: They did.
But was it a rude awakening?
>>FUCHS: It was a
totally rude awakening,
because believe it or not, most
of my time in pharmacy school
was spent studying toxicity.
>>NOORY: Yes.
>>FUCHS: It was spent
studying poisons, and how
to control poisons, how
to mitigate poisons,
how to soften the
blow of side effects,
how to increase what
they call compliance.
One of the biggest
problems in medicine
is patients don't like
taking their drugs.
They inherently know inside
that there's something
up with medications,
and so you've
got to come up
with different ways
to assure that
patients take drugs.
So I was really troubled by
the idea that when we're sick,
we actually get
poisoned to get better.
It just never made sense to me.
>>NOORY: Was there
a point that you
were giving somebody
prescriptions
and you didn't want to do it?
>>FUCHS: That's
exactly what happened.
When I graduated pharmacy
school, I noticed--
you know, when I was in pharmacy
school, I worked in the lab.
I didn't really
work in drugstores.
And when I got out into
the drugstore world
and started working in
pharmacies, it dawned on me--
I don't know why it
didn't dawn on me
before-- but it dawned on
me that I was the guy who
was giving the poison.
And it was mostly
to young people--
to babies and older people.
Those are the people who
get most of the medicine.
So I started suggesting
people to use
nutrition instead of drugs.
And then pretty soon, as
the effects of the nutrients
kicked in and people
started getting better,
I started suggesting that people
use nutrients instead of drugs.
And that did not--
that did not win me any
friends at the pharmacy
that I was working at.
So you know what I did?
I started my own pharmacy.
>>NOORY: Did your own stuff.
>>FUCHS: Yeah, I
did my own stuff.
>>NOORY: What's
our immune system?
What has the body done
for an immune system?
>>FUCHS: That's
a great question.
It's a relevant question with
all the stuff that's going on
with diseases, with infections.
The immune system is our
body's evolutionarily
selected for system
for fighting the enemy.
You know it's a jungle
out there, George.
Everything is trying to
eat everything else, right?
So the human body
is a rich source
of nutrients for
bacteria and viruses
and microbes of all kinds.
And so throughout
evolution, the human body
has evolved a system for
destroying the enemy.
And this system, George, is
so unbelievably orchestrated.
It's so complex.
It's almost space age.
You've got little
heat-seeking missiles.
You know, they talk
about antibodies.
You hear all the talk
about antibodies?
>>NOORY: Oh, sure.
>>FUCHS: They're heat-seeking
missiles, George.
And they're not just
heat-seeking missiles.
They're heat-seeking missiles
that are intelligently designed
to attack specific enemies.
>>NOORY: And they
group up on it.
>>FUCHS: They group up on
it, and they munch it down,
and they shoot it down.
And it's so unbelievable.
If you zoom into it,
it is-- science fiction
couldn't be any more
dramatic and profound.
>>NOORY: Since the immune system
is inherent in our bodies,
why doesn't it
work all the time?
>>FUCHS: It works pretty
much most of the time.
It can get overwhelmed, and
it can also turn in on itself.
Sometimes the enemy gets
confused with the body.
Sometimes the enemy
can change the body
so that the immune system sees
the body itself as an enemy.
It's called autoimmunity.
>>NOORY: And attacks the body.
>>FUCHS: It attacks the body.
But it doesn't do
it in a wrong way.
It's not crazy and
it's not mistaken.
But something has been
distorted in the body.
When a distortion occurs in a
body-- when we say the body,
I mean a cell of the body.
When a cellular
system gets distorted,
it looks foreign to the body.
So the real question
with autoimmunity
is, what is causing
this distortion?
And guess what?
It almost always
involves our lifestyle.
And that's really the
bottom line, George.
The immune system is close to
perfect, as close to perfect
as you can get.
But our lifestyles are such
that it leads the immune system
to sometimes act like a rogue.
>>NOORY: I want you
to react to this, Ben.
On one of the Gaia's
programs, "Healing Matrix,"
David Wolfe talks about
activated charcoal in a world
filled with all kinds of toxins.
Let's take a look.
>>DAVID WOLFE: We
live in a toxic world.
Our food, air, and water
is loaded with toxins.
I mean, just driving down
the highway here to get here,
we've got all this exhaust.
We're breathing in
all this brake dust
and exhaust from
all these engines.
Some of the worst
carcinogens are right there.
We're breathing it in.
We're relying on our liver,
our kidneys, and our spleen
and other filtration organs
to filter that stuff off.
Is it possible that
we're overloaded?
And I'd say the answer
is very likely yes.
So carbon is an
excellent detoxifier.
It's the best.
It cleans your water.
Charcoal filters.
It cleans your air.
It's what's used, for
example, in dialysis.
What do they use to
clean your blood?
Charcoal filters.
What is the best filtration
mechanism there is?
It's charcoal.
And it's adsorptive,
interestingly.
Not absorptive like a sponge.
Adsorptive, like
electromagnetically
attracts the wrong charge
materials like heavy metals,
for example, or glyphosate.
It's attracted to the
charcoal, so it's not a sponge.
People think, oh, it's a sponge.
It isn't.
>>SUE MORTER: So it's
more like electroplating.
>>WOLFE: Uh-huh.
Yes.
It's like a refrigerator.
You know, the charcoal comes
in like your refrigerator,
and it attracts all
those magnets to it.
But eventually, there's
too many magnets
and it doesn't stick
to the fridge anymore,
and then that
charcoal's been used up.
But that takes a
while to use it up.
>>NOORY: I've seen people
take charcoal supplements.
>>FUCHS: Well, not
necessarily supplements,
but on a daily basis.
Dave Wolfe's
awesome, by the way.
And charcoal's the
universal antidote.
In pharmacy school, we used it
as an antidote for poisoning.
Why?
Because as David
says, it adsorbs--
A-D-- adsorbs--
>>NOORY: Just like a sponge.
>>FUCHS: Not like a sponge.
A sponge is when the stuff
goes inside the sponge.
Adsorption is on the surface.
It's an electromagnetic
phenomena.
>>NOORY: It doesn't take it in.
>>FUCHS: It doesn't
take it in, no.
It sits on the surface.
>>NOORY: But it collects it.
>>FUCHS: It collects
it electromagnetically.
It's got a very
large surface area,
and it's very electromagnet--
has electromagnetic properties.
There's a substance
called fullerenes.
Have you heard of this,
this C60 or fullerenes?
>>NOORY: No, tell me about that.
>>FUCHS: It's a
derivative of carbon,
and it comes from charcoal,
and it's actually used now
medicinally to deliver things.
Acts like a delivery system.
It's an amazing molecule, also
known as C60 or buckyballs.
Remember, Buckminster
Fuller came up with it.
Right.
It looks like a soccer ball.
It's a molecular soccer
ball with a hollow center.
It's the most gorgeous,
beautiful, symmetrical molecule
that has 60 carbons,
all arranged
in this symmetrical fashion
that forms a soccer ball.
And the soccer ball's
hollow in the middle,
and that allows fullerenes to
be used as a delivery system, as
well as a detoxifying system.
And it comes from charcoal.
>>NOORY: Who designed all this?
>>FUCHS: [LAUGHS]
>>NOORY: Come on.
Who designed this?
>>FUCHS: Don't you love it?
>>NOORY: This isn't just random.
>>FUCHS: Yeah.
We should be in awe
of this, George.
And I know you are, because
I listen to your show.
Everything-- just
look around us.
Just the world itself--
>>NOORY: It's amazing.
>>FUCHS: Amazing, George.
This is what we
want to be honoring.
When it comes to
health-- you know,
I'm a health care professional.
But I'm a health
care professional
because I'm in awe of
the biochemical system
of biochemistry and biology.
Like you said, who
puts it together?
We talked about a cell.
Do you know what?
A cell is one 100th the
size of a head of a pin.
And when you think about
high school biology,
you remember a cell
was a circle, right?
>>NOORY: Mm-hmm.
>>FUCHS: Not a circle.
It's a blob.
And within that blob, you
have hundreds of thousands
of chemicals changing
every second.
>>NOORY: And reacting.
>>FUCHS: Every second, George.
Imagine.
How big would a
factory have to be
to make 100,000 different
molecules at all,
let alone every second?
And it's all occurring
with an intelligence that
is beyond our comprehension.
>>NOORY: Then why do
people get cancer, Ben?
>>FUCHS: Well, you know, we've
mucked up our environment.
Cancer is a sign of a
body that's under duress.
You know, a cancer cell
is a very smart cell.
>>NOORY: Well, wait.
Was there cancer 2,000--
>>FUCHS: Yes, absolutely.
There's cancer that
happened in ancient Egypt.
But here's the thing.
A cell-- this is so cool.
A cell that we have,
that we talk about--
I just talked about
the cell in the body--
that's an advanced cell.
But there's also a
primitive type of cell.
There's two types of cells.
They call them prokaryotes and
eukaryotes, primitive cells
and advanced cells.
A cancer cell is a
cell that has gone back
from being an
advanced cell in time
to becoming a primitive
cell, because it
doesn't know what else to do.
It's at its wit's end.
>>NOORY: But it replicates.
>>FUCHS: Well, here's the thing.
In order for a cell to
become a liver cell,
it has to give up
something of itself.
It has to sacrifice its
independence so it can become
a liver cell or a bone cell.
But if it's been abused,
malnourished, suffocated,
toxic, you know what it says?
It says, forget you.
I'm not going to
be a liver cell.
>>NOORY: I'm out of here.
>>FUCHS: I'm out of here.
Exactly.
I'm just going to
divide on my own.
And a cancer cell is a cell that
is not cooperating any longer.
It's a sociopathic cell, and
it only becomes sociopathic
when it's at its
wit's end and it
doesn't know what else to do.
And that's the idea.
We have this war on cancer and
we're going to fight cancer.
Cancer's us.
It's our cells.
And when you fight cancer,
you're fighting yourself.
And it's almost emblematic--
our idea of how we treat cancer
is almost a paragon of
this idea of the enemy
being outside of us.
Remember Pogo?
>>NOORY: Oh, yeah.
>>FUCHS: I have seen
the enemy, and he is us.
>>NOORY: He is us.
>>FUCHS: Right.
The enemy is us.
And what we want to be
doing is loving our body,
not killing our body.
Cancer is a sign that the
body needs to be nourished,
a sign that the body needs to
be breathed and oxygenated,
a sign that the body needs
to be cleaned and detoxified.
In short, a sign that the body
needs to be loved, not killed.
This whole medical
strategy of killing cancer
is emblematic of how
we treat all diseases.
We fight them.
We kill them.
We create a war on them when
in reality, all they need,
George, is a little bit of love.
>>NOORY: Why do some people
get diseases and others simply
don't?
>>FUCHS: You just said it
right there in the word.
Dis-ease.
Dis-ease means out of ease.
When we are out of ease, whether
it's spiritually-- you know,
I talk about this all the time--
spiritually,
mentally-- mentally,
emotionally or physically,
when we are out of ease on one
of those levels or on
all of those levels--
I call it SMEP--
what ends up happening is the
body's stress response system
kicks in.
And the stress
response system, which
is a manifestation
of this dis-ease,
it's like running your house
on an emergency generator
or running your
computer on safe mode.
It allows you to do a
certain amount of things,
but it doesn't allow you
to be fully functional.
And one of the
things that happens
when we're under large
amounts of duress
and we're secreting
stress hormones
is our defenses go down.
Our immune system
becomes suppressed.
That's why you use
cortisol creams.
When you have an immune
reaction on your skin,
they give you cortisol creams.
They give you a cream that
suppresses your immune system.
Cortisol and stress
suppress the immune system.
Why?
Because stress management
is a long-term endeavor.
To manage stress doesn't have
to do with the short term.
>>NOORY: Now, you're
also an expert in skin.
>>FUCHS: Yes.
>>NOORY: You're not
a dermatologist.
>>FUCHS: No.
>>NOORY: You're a pharmacist.
>>FUCHS: I'm a
dermatological pharmacist.
>>NOORY: But how did you
get involved in that?
>>FUCHS: Ah, long story.
But I went to the University
of Colorado in Boulder
and I had this
incredible opportunity.
A lot of people
don't realize this,
but you know the lip
medicine Blistex?
Well, it turns out that the
gentleman who invented Blistex
was a professor
at the University
of Colorado School of Pharmacy.
>>NOORY: And you knew him.
>>FUCHS: And he was
a retired professor,
and I just stumbled
into his lab one day,
and the next thing I knew, I
was his research assistant.
And for the next four years
I was in the laboratory,
making skin care products.
Testing skin care products,
learning about the skin,
making formulas
for Dr. Jones, just
getting a soup to nuts
experience and background
and education in how you
make pharmacy-quality,
medicinal-quality
skin care products.
>>NOORY: What is melanoma?
>>FUCHS: Melanoma is probably
the most aggressive cancer.
It's a cancer of what I consider
as a skin care guy, but even
a biochemistry
guy, to be the most
fascinating cell in the body,
and that is the melanocyte.
Cyte in biology means cell.
Melanocyte is a cell
that makes melanin.
Melanin-- pigment, right--
is so unbelievable, George.
They use it in
computer chips now,
because it has an ability to
transduce electrical energy.
Can you imagine this?
It has this incredible ability
to hold onto and transduce
and manipulate electrons,
electronic energy and photons,
photonic energy.
It's a fascinating molecule.
But all of this
electrical energy
makes it very powerful when it
comes to the way cells divide.
And melanocytes are famous
for dividing very rapidly
in the case of melanomas.
So rapidly that it's
considered to be
the deadliest form of cancer.
>>NOORY: I mean, you could
have a small little melanoma,
cancerous, and it'll kill you.
>>FUCHS: Absolutely.
>>NOORY: How does that happen?
>>FUCHS: Electricity.
You know, we talk about
chemistry all the time,
and I love biochemistry.
But really, biochemistry is
secondary to bioelectricity.
And any time you're
working with electricity,
it's like any electricity.
It's a dual-edged sword,
a double-edged sword.
Electricity can
turn on your light.
Electricity can kill you.
And in the body,
bioelectricity can
run your body or bioelectrical
phenomena can cause cancer.
In fact, cancer at
the end of the day
is a biochemical disruption at
the level of the cell membrane.
It's a biochemical
phenomena more
than it is a
chemistry phenomena.
In fact, the entire body is
a biochemical phenomena more
than it is a biochemical.
>>NOORY: Some
dermatologists recommend
that we stay out of the sun.
>>FUCHS: [LAUGHS]
>>NOORY: Others like
you say, get some sun.
Get that vitamin
D3 in your system,
a natural thing from the sun.
What's going on?
>>FUCHS: It's more than vitamin
D. It's a mood stabilizer.
In fact, the sun doesn't
just contact our skin.
It contacts our eyes.
And by its relationship
to the eyes,
by its interaction
with the eyes,
it communicates to our
brain to make us happy,
to make us eat less food.
>>NOORY: I've seen that happen.
>>FUCHS: To make us
stronger, to build tissue.
Sunglasses are one of
the worst things you
can wear for this, by the way.
I never wear sunglasses.
>>NOORY: I have to.
You squint.
>>FUCHS: Well, I just--
I don't squint, necessarily.
By the way, first thing in
the morning if you look right
into the sun really
quickly when you wake up,
you'll get a big
surge of serotonin,
and it'll set you off on your--
>>NOORY: Really?
>>FUCHS: Yes, first
thing in the morning.
>>NOORY: Don't look
at it too long.
>>FUCHS: No, you don't
want to burn your eyes.
But just look at it real
quickly for five or 10 seconds.
So the sun, though, like we
were saying about electricity,
is very powerful.
And so if you're not
careful with the sun
and you're not
nutritionally sound,
you're not going to
be able to handle
all that photonic energy,
and it can stimulate things
like, for example, cancers.
However, we are solar
beings in the sense
that we derive electrical
energy from exposure to the sun.
When your skin gets
exposed to the sun,
the photons get
turned into electrons,
which get turned into
biochemistry to run your body.
So we are not fully, but at
least partially, solar beings,
and we derive
energy from the sun.
In fact, eating
food is really just
to derive the energy
that's been trapped
in that food from the sun.
>>NOORY: What do you
think of sunscreens?
>>FUCHS: Well,
sunscreens need to be
distinguished from sunblocks,
which is very important.
>>NOORY: There's a difference?
>>FUCHS: There's a
difference, absolutely.
And this is not something that
a lot of people know about.
So we'll talk about sun
protection in general.
Sunscreens are toxic chemicals.
And if you were to
eat a sunscreen,
octyl methoxycinnamate--
>>NOORY: Well, no, you're
not going to eat it.
>>FUCHS: Well, it
would be deadly poison.
And you're right.
You're not going to eat it.
But do you really want
to put a deadly poison
on top of your skin?
>>NOORY: Doesn't that
absorb it into your body?
>>FUCHS: Absolutely.
There's measurable amounts
of sunscreen chemicals
in various tissues of the body
when you put sunscreens on,
particularly the very powerful
ones, which are called benzos.
Sunblocks on the other
hand-- oh, and by the way,
sunscreens don't
block all sun rays.
They only block UVB rays.
There's three different
major sun rays.
There's three
different sun rays.
There's UVA, UVB, and UVC.
Now, you could put extra
poison in your sunscreen
to block the UVA, but
most sunscreens will only
block UVB, the burning ray.
>>NOORY: Do people
get sick from this?
>>FUCHS: We don't know.
As a lot of times,
we don't know.
But we do know that
sunscreens are cytotoxic,
meaning they're toxic to cells.
And if you were to put a
sunscreen in a Petri dish
with a bunch of cells, that
cell would become toxic.
Now to me, as a health
care professional
and as a skin care
professional, that
doesn't seem very smart to do.
In fact, in Hawaii-- you
probably know this-- in Hawaii,
they won't even let you wear
sunscreens in the water,
because it'll kill the coral.
>>NOORY: Right.
>>FUCHS: Right?
>>NOORY: The chemicals.
>>FUCHS: That's right.
But sunblocks, on
the other hand--
there's two major sunblocks.
One's called titanium dioxide.
The other's called zinc oxide.
Those reflect all
of the sun's rays.
>>NOORY: Again they're
all chemicals, though.
>>FUCHS: Well, zinc oxide
is a nutritional substance.
So zinc oxide is the
way to go if you're
going to protect your skin.
Personally, I don't think that
you need to worry necessarily
about protecting your skin
unless you're baking out
in the sun, and then you do.
Or you're playing
golf or playing tennis
or hanging out at the beach.
But zinc oxide heals
your skin in addition
to being a sun-protective
chemical or molecule.
>>NOORY: Ben, once again
on Gaia's "Healing Matrix"
television show,
Joshua Onysko who
is an expert in skin, talks
about different chemicals
as you have been in skincare.
>>REGINA MEREDITH: One of
the things you write about
and talk about is the
fact that 95% of products
are not the product
you think you're
getting that's being advertised
but actually fillers.
So let's just start
launching into what's
in the stuff we put on us.
>>JOSHUA ONYSKO: So when you go
out and buy a cosmetic product,
it's usually made of 95% filler,
which means it's generally
a petroleum-based filler.
Fills up the packaging.
And then the company
will put a couple percent
of what's called an active
ingredient, which gives you
this desired effect, whether
it's moisturizing or hydrating,
removing fine
lines and wrinkles.
So you're getting
this effect, which
makes you think, oh,
the product's working.
But then the next
morning you wake up
and you have to
reapply and reapply.
And it's not feeding the skin.
It's not actually adding
nutrition to the skin.
It's just giving you
this desired effect.
And when we're using
plants, and plants
are distilled properly
and combined properly
and the product is
being created properly,
plants can actually deliver both
the immediate effects, but also
long-term nourishment
for the skin.
And as I was saying
earlier, your skin
is your largest organ.
We need to be feeding it
the same things that we're
feeding our body.
And as we were talking
about before the show,
95% of skin care and
skin health is nutrition.
>>NOORY: Do you
agree with that, Ben?
>>FUCHS: A lot of what he said.
Plants are adaptogenic.
Plants act to-- this is so cool.
The maker, whatever
put everything--
>>NOORY: It's a great design.
>>FUCHS: Right?
It's a great design.
Plants have molecules in
them that defend our cells.
They call them adaptogens.
You may have heard of this term.
And that is they're stress
management molecules.
There's some
nutrition in plants,
but their real claim to fame--
I should say, there's a
lot of nutrition in plants,
but not all of it's
available through the skin.
Plants' claim to fame, if
you will, on the skin, is it
has an ability to protect
cells from the environment.
And that is so cool that
there's this interaction,
this cooperative relationship,
this symbiotic relationship
between plants and
animals in the sense
that plants protect animals.
Plant cells protect
animal cells.
>>NOORY: Interesting.
That design is there to
take care of all of us.
>>FUCHS: Isn't it unbelievable?
I remember there was a fire
in Boulder a few years ago,
and the very herb that's
needed to heal burns
grew where all of
the trees had--
St. John's wort, it's called--
grew where all the trees
had been burnt down.
Nature had somehow in its
wisdom put St. John's wort
on the area that had been
burnt, the same way you would
put St. John's wort on a burn
if you had a burn on your body.
>>NOORY: Well, you know, you see
some of these classical movies,
and somebody gets
wounded or cut,
and a Native American
comes by and takes
some herbs or something that
patches them up and sticks it.
How did they know how
to do those things?
>>FUCHS: My god.
I have no idea how they knew.
You know-- I'll tell
you how they knew.
Did you ever hear of Findhorn?
>>NOORY: No.
>>FUCHS: Findhorn was a
place I think in-- somewhere
in the North Atlantic.
I'm not sure exactly
where it was.
But they discovered that if
they talked to the plants,
not only would the plants
communicate back to them
what they needed, but
the plants would actually
grow bigger and
stronger and better
if they were communicated
to and talking to.
And so if you ask a
Native indigenous person,
they will tell you, we learnt
by talking to the plants.
They told us what they
were, and they told us
how we could use them, and
they told us what they needed.
And when you think about
it, it kind of makes sense
that everything would have
an ability to communicate.
It's just we don't
speak the language.
>>NOORY: Well, this is
an interesting study
that was conducted with
plants, a real experiment where
they hooked up an EEG
device to two plants.
And they darkened the room.
A guy comes in, and they've got
their readings on the plants.
Beep, beep, beep, beep, beep.
A guy comes in and rips the
shred out of one of the plants.
Pulls it out of a pot,
breaks it up, throws it away,
and the other plant
is next to it.
All of a sudden--
>>FUCHS: Freaks out.
>>NOORY: --its EEG
is going crazy.
>>FUCHS: Yeah.
>>NOORY: I mean, it really is
responding to the stimulus.
>>FUCHS: That's right.
It was a guy named
Cleve Backster.
>>NOORY: That's right.
>>FUCHS: Right?
He was a lie detector guy.
>>NOORY: The late Cleve.
>>FUCHS: The late Cleve.
Did you know him?
Did you have him--
>>NOORY: Yeah, I
had him on the show.
>>FUCHS: Isn't that amazing?
"The Secret Life of Plants."
>>NOORY: Yep.
>>FUCHS: What's more, if
you thought about the plant,
if you thought something
bad about the plant--
>>NOORY: It would pick it up.
>>FUCHS: It would pick it up.
>>NOORY: It would register.
>>FUCHS: Exactly.
>>NOORY: And then the guy left.
The plant calmed down.
>>FUCHS: Isn't that a--
>>NOORY: He comes back in--
>>FUCHS: It freaks out again?
It remembers.
>>NOORY: Yeah.
>>FUCHS: Oh my god.
>>NOORY: It's unbelievable.
>>FUCHS: Yeah,
it's unbelievable.
>>NOORY: How do
you explain that?
>>FUCHS: Because we are
so arrogant to think that
we're the only sentient
beings on the planet,
that we're the only--
not sentient beings,
but we're the highest
of the sentient beings.
We don't respect animals either.
Have you ever had Temple
Grandin on the show?
>>NOORY: No.
>>FUCHS: Temple Grandin
is an autistic professor.
She has autism and she's
a professor at CSU.
And because she's so
in tune with things,
she understands how
to speak to animals,
how to communicate to animals.
And she designs various
humane slaughtering machines,
because she understands how
to communicate to animals.
And she says in her books,
animals have just as much
of a soul, life as
a human being does.
And when you think about
it, why shouldn't they?
Why shouldn't all living things?
>>NOORY: It's alive.
>>FUCHS: It's alive.
Exactly.
>>NOORY: I think an ant
has some kind of ability.
>>FUCHS: Sentience.
I absolutely believe that.
>>NOORY: And they're
all intelligent.
>>FUCHS: Exactly.
Even the cell itself
is intelligent.
>>NOORY: You ever see a group
of ants build something?
>>FUCHS: How do they
do that, George?
How do termites?
Did you ever see termites, the
kind of buildings termites do?
Everything you're
talking about, George,
those are the things that
should make headlines.
Those are the--
>>NOORY: Those are
wonders of this planet,
to tell you the truth.
>>FUCHS: Yes.
But because our brains
are hardwired to survive,
we see negative.
We have a negative bias.
We always see the dark side.
We always see the bad
side, because that's
the part that's threatening.
>>NOORY: Spiritual, mental,
emotional, and physical.
>>FUCHS: SMEP.
>>NOORY: What is that?
It's a combination.
>>FUCHS: Yes.
As a healer, somebody in
the healing profession,
I noticed that when
I was dispensing
nutritional strategies or
using nutritional strategies
and recommending supplements,
people would get better,
but they'd plateau.
They would stay the same.
They would get better
at first, and then they
would stay the same.
And I noticed that
behind all disease,
there was usually some
kind of emotional crisis,
there was some kind
of mental crisis,
and there was some kind
of physical crisis.
Or a spiritual
crisis, I'm sorry.
And what I mean by that is
we talked about dis-ease
as being the body out of ease.
When you are spiritually
disconnected or mentally not
thinking the right
thoughts or emotionally
in turmoil or anger,
it shows up physically.
So via hormones,
our mental natures
and our emotional natures
turn into our bodies.
And via our sense of connection
to the universe-- to me,
spirituality is unified field.
It's this idea that we're all
connected with each other.
And it's not airy fairy, George.
Because as I'm breathing
out, you're breathing in.
You have atoms that were in
me a moment ago now in you.
There's really no disconnection.
Our senses deceive us.
And this sense of deceit
begins when we're born.
When we come out of the
womb, we see the world
as being outside of us,
and we see this sense
that it's me against the world.
Spirituality to me is this
idea that it's no longer--
it's not me against the
world, but the universe
is here for me.
When we see the world against
us, we secrete cortisol.
Our body goes into
the stress response.
That's where the immune
system shuts down.
That's where our collagen
becomes deteriorated.
That's when we don't heal.
And ultimately,
that's where we die.
In fact, one of the
things that cortisol does
is it'll keep you
from falling asleep.
Have you noticed how many
people have insomnia?
Do you know how many
people have sleep problems?
Especially as they get older.
>>NOORY: It's huge.
>>FUCHS: It's huge.
And it's a classic
manifestation of a body that's
spiritually
disconnected, mentally
and emotionally
incorrect in the sense
that we don't feel connected.
We live in fear.
We live in the sympathetic
nervous system, this fight
or flight nervous system versus
the parasympathetic nervous
system, which is the
relaxation, rest,
and digest nervous system.
>>NOORY: I've seen
so many studies, Ben,
that has to do with stress
and how it affects the body.
It's absolutely
staggering, isn't it?
>>FUCHS: Yeah.
It's because this whole
cortisol connection.
One of the best
medications is meditation.
>>NOORY: Absolutely.
>>FUCHS: Right?
And it's not airy fairy.
It's not kind of-- you
don't have to be a Buddhist.
You don't have to sit
cross-legged on a mat.
It could be just something
as sitting still and watching
your thoughts.
There's a guy named Herbert
Benson who wrote a book called
"The Relaxation Response."
Have you heard of him?
>>NOORY: Yeah.
>>FUCHS: Yeah, he was
a Harvard physician.
And funny story
about Herbert Benson.
He noticed, by the
way, that meditation
would lower your
blood pressure, it
would improve cardiovascular
markers, your immune system,
brain health.
You secrete more Brain-Derived
Neurotrophic Factor, BDNF.
I was just reading a study
about lowering cholesterol
with meditation a
couple of days ago.
What Herbert Benson
noticed was that all
of the markers of dis-ease
would improve when
you sat still and meditated.
And first, he tried to
get people to say om.
>>NOORY: (CHANTING) Om.
>>FUCHS: Like that, right?
But he was at Harvard,
so that didn't work.
So he had-- he says-- he
tells people to say one now.
So he had everybody
going (CHANTING) one.
One.
Like that, which is
kind of the same thing.
>>NOORY: Well, the Dalai
Lama says that all the time.
>>FUCHS: One?
>>NOORY: He's one with
this, one with that.
>>FUCHS: Yeah, yeah.
Yeah.
And that's the idea of
disconnection leading
to disease.
Unity is parasympathetic.
Separation is sympathetic.
In the Bible, Jesus says, you're
either with me or against me.
To me, the parasympathetic
nervous system
is your love nervous system.
It's your Jesus nervous system,
your Christ nervous system.
The sympathetic nervous system
is your lie nervous system,
your deceitful nervous system.
It's the nervous
system that says
that the world is against you.
And this is the
nervous system that
would be associated with
satanic forces, the dark forces.
So to me, Jesus
was teaching about
the parasympathetic
nervous system
and the sympathetic
nervous system.
And when he says, I am
the light of the world,
he's talking about the
parasympathetic nervous system.
And when he says, get
thee Satan behind me,
he's talking about the
sympathetic nervous system.
In "A Course in Miracles," they
say there's only two forces.
There's only two forces in
the world, the force of love
and the force of evil.
And you could neurologically
say there's only
two forces in the
body, the force
of the parasympathetic
nervous system
and the force of the
sympathetic nervous system.
>>NOORY: Now when you were
talking about meditation
and getting into
this mode, again,
the ancients knew
this a long time ago.
The Chinese know it
better than anybody.
>>FUCHS: Chinese
knew a lot of stuff.
>>NOORY: Where did
they learn this from?
Who taught them?
>>FUCHS: They didn't have TV.
They didn't have
anybody yelling at them,
a talking head yelling at
them about the latest news,
about the latest thing that they
have to be afraid-- whatever.
So they probably spent a lot
of time in contemplation.
Now, it wasn't necessarily the
working people that were doing
it, but there was a
whole section, a whole--
a demographic group of
monks who would sit in--
who would just sit in
the mountains somewhere
and eat good food and meditate
and concentrate on god,
and concentrate
on all the things
we just talked about today.
Nature, the power of nature.
Look, if you're an
ancient person, George,
what do you think of the sun?
>>NOORY: Oh, it's a god.
>>FUCHS: Exactly.
>>NOORY: It's a god.
You would worship the thing.
You'd say, how is
this happening?
How is this even possible?
The Sumerians, they
studied the stars.
They knew about
Sirius, and they knew
about the various
constellations.
They knew about the movements
of the sun and the stars.
>>NOORY: They knew about
things that they're not
supposed to know.
>>FUCHS: Well, there's some--
>>NOORY: Who told them?
>>FUCHS: There's some
interesting things there
about ancient Sumeria.
Where did that come from?
How did that pop out in
the world all of a sudden?
You have an empire that
knew about agriculture
and had hierarchies
and had royalty.
>>NOORY: Ben, once again
on Gaia's "Healing Matrix,"
Paul Austin, who's
a great researcher,
talked about microdosing.
>>MORTER: "Healing
Matrix" is interested
in a holistic approach,
like, all things considered.
The whole human gets to
become a self-healer,
gets to awaken to
their full potential.
Are there other things that
you recommend for people
to help support them
when they're going
through a regime like this?
Are there nutritional
programs that people
should be focusing on?
Are there other types
of daily activities
that they should be doing
around this to stabilize
this kind of
evolutionary experience
that they're going through?
>>PAUL AUSTIN: So one
thing to bring up right off
the bat is microdosing
from my perspective
is really just to lead
in to a higher dose.
So although there are
a number of benefits
that can come from microdosing,
from my perspective,
that true paradigm shift in
how we perceive ourselves
and our relationship
to the world
can come from higher doses.
So that's one thing to consider.
But beyond that, we're
really looking at just
general mindfulness practices.
So one thing we
encourage is, again,
microdosing used as
a catalyst to start
a practice of meditation,
to start a practice of yoga,
to start being more
mindful about what
we're putting into our bodies.
I won't prescribe any
sort of specific diet,
but generally, eating
things that are fresh,
that are unprocessed,
that come from plants
and maybe some animals is
generally pretty healthy.
And so it's really important
that people perceive
microdosing, again, not as
just this drug that I'll take
and that it'll fix all my
problems-- because this
is sort of our context of
current health care, right?
We take an antidepressant,
take an anti-anxiety pill.
The doctor just says, take this.
It'll fix what it needs to,
and we just rely on that.
And we give all our power away
to something outside of us.
Well, microdosing
is about-- it's
about bringing that agency,
bringing that autonomy back
into ourselves and
then leveraging
it to be able to create
a new way of living.
And again, when we
look at microdosing,
it's helping to facilitate
neuroplasticity,
habit change, the same thing
that meditation and yoga do.
So combining it with
those practices,
people have found it
to be very effective.
>>NOORY: So what's the
purpose, Ben, of microdosing?
>>FUCHS: Well, I assume he's
talking about psychedelics,
and that's when you take a very,
very, very, very tiny dose.
Not enough to put you into
a full-blown hallucinogenic,
psychedelic trip, so to speak.
But just enough to adjust
or skew your sense of what's
real, just very, very slightly.
>>NOORY: But why?
>>FUCHS: Well, if you're
stuck in a rut, for example,
they use microdosing
for depression.
>>NOORY: They don't
want to overdo it?
>>FUCHS: Yeah, they
don't want to overdo it.
They just want to skew
reality a little bit.
What psychedelics do is they
skew your sense of reality.
And so a large dose
of psychedelics
will make you realize that,
wait a minute, George.
This thing that we
consider to be real
is a function of biochemistry.
There's no real
here really, George.
There is a biochemical
representation
of what is out there, which
is really only the matrix.
It's waves.
It's digits.
It's 0s and 1s.
And somehow we put
that all together.
And when you do
psychedelics, you
start to see the arbitrary
nature of this synthesis
of what we call to be reality.
Microdosing doesn't
quite do it like that,
but it does it just enough
so that if you're in a rut,
you're depressed, or you're not
as creative as you want to be
or you don't like your job or
you're dealing with anxiety,
it can modify your sense
of reality just so,
so it can sort of readjust you.
That's the concept behind it.
But as Paul alluded to, you want
to be nutritionally correct.
You want to be eating right.
You want to make sure that
your body is strong enough
to be handling things,
because unless you're
talking about
natural microdosing
with psilocybin, if you're
microdosing with LSD,
for example, or pharmaceutical
kinds of substances,
you're still
dealing with a drug.
And at the end of the
day, a drug is a toxin
and the body has to
handle it like it
handles any kind of toxin.
>>NOORY: What is dirty blood?
>>FUCHS: [LAUGHS] Dirty
blood is the cause of all--
physiologic cause of
all health challenges.
The circulatory system
moves in a circuit.
The circulatory system.
It moves in a circle.
And as it's moving
in a circle, it's
generating an electrical charge.
This electrical
charge is referred to
as a zeta potential.
And this electrical charge
is what runs our body.
We are a hemodynamic system.
>>NOORY: The body electric.
>>FUCHS: The body electric.
Exactly.
This hemodynamic movement
of fluid in a circle
generates electrical charges.
Not only that, but
oxygen is delivered
to the cells via this
circulatory system,
and toxins are removed through
the circulatory system,
and the nutrients
are delivered through
this circulatory system.
As we age and as our body
starts to break down,
one of the things that
happens is substances
start to leak through the
intestine into the bloodstream.
This is called
leaky gut syndrome.
And it's not only--
>>NOORY: That's not good.
>>FUCHS: It's very bad.
It's not only a sign
of aging, but it's also
accelerated by
foods that we eat,
processed foods that we eat,
especially gluten, for example,
and fried fats.
In fact, our health
challenges as a culture,
our chronic disease
crisis, started
to really get going
when we figured out how
to, number one, fry fatty foods
and create artificial fats,
and when our diets started to
contain large concentrations
of gluten and other carbohy--
other-- what they call
lectins, components--
>>NOORY: We are what we eat.
>>FUCHS: We are what we eat.
Now, back to your
dirty blood question,
is the combination of these bad
foods, these processed foods,
fried fats, as well as large
amounts of these lectins
that come from grains
and other substances,
they start to
cause deterioration
at the level of the intestine.
Once the intestine
starts to deteriorate,
toxins can leak into the blood.
Under ordinary circumstances--
>>NOORY: Through the intestine?
>>FUCHS: Through the intestine.
This is called
leaky gut syndrome
or intestinal
permeability syndrome.
Once those substances
that should not
be in the bloodstream get into
the blood, an immune system,
a defensive response is
mounted inside the bloodstream,
creating these clogs
and these clots, these--
>>NOORY: Ugh.
>>FUCHS: --fibrotic
balls-- exactly.
That's exactly right.
And that impairs the
movement of the circulation,
of the circulatory system,
lowering the zeta potential,
the electrical charge, and
impairing the blood's ability
to deliver nutrients and
oxygen and detoxify the cells.
That's what I call dirty blood.
>>NOORY: That's not good.
>>FUCHS: Very bad.
>>NOORY: Is that like
clogged oil in your car?
>>FUCHS: Exactly.
Like clogged oil in your car.
That's a great metaphor.
It's like clogged
oil in your car.
And guess what, George?
Every single chronic,
long-term, degenerative disease
can be backtracked
to dirty blood.
That is 80% of our
health care challenges.
And you know what else, George?
Dirty blood is simple
to take care of.
>>NOORY: How do you filter that?
>>FUCHS: How do you
filter the blood?
Well, there's ways that you
can filter it with what's
called chelation therapy.
I don't know if
you've ever heard--
>>NOORY: I've
heard of chelation.
>>FUCHS: It's wonderful stuff.
That's where they actually
inject a chelating agent.
A chelating agent's
like a magnet
that magnetically pulls out--
>>NOORY: EDTA.
>>FUCHS: EDTA.
That's exactly right.
And you can take it orally.
>>NOORY: Yeah, I surprised you.
>>FUCHS: That's pretty good.
Now you know, I'm not
surprised anymore,
because you know some stuff.
Vitamin C is a chelating agent.
Selenium is a chelating agent.
Sulfur is a chelating--
>>NOORY: Zinc?
>>FUCHS: Zinc isn't
quite a chelating agent.
>>NOORY: Not for that.
>>FUCHS: Zinc's amazing, though.
N-acetylcysteine is
a chelating agent.
And then also, one of the best
ways to clean the blood out
is to make sure that you're
not putting the toxins
in the body in the first place.
>>NOORY: What about
the herb burdock?
>>FUCHS: Burdock is great.
Wonderful liver stimulant.
Wonderful, wonderful
detoxifying substance.
It doesn't quite clean
the blood out directly,
but it helps the
liver, and the liver
is one of the main organs
for cleaning the blood.
>>NOORY: Well, it's amazing.
Now once you do that, do
you start feeling better?
>>FUCHS: Yes.
Almost immediately.
Chelation therapy one
session of chelation therapy,
and you'll feel
better immediately.
Fasting.
I talk a lot about fasting.
One of the major reasons
for the benefit--
there's a lot of reasons,
but one of the major reasons
is you stop the entrance of
toxins into the bloodstream.
And this is one
of the reasons why
all autoimmune and chronic
degenerative diseases
begin to improve
when people fast.
And by the way, autoimmunity
is a major consequence
of dirty blood.
Our friend Dr. Joe Dispenza
on one of the Gaia programs
called "Rewired" talked
about the ability of the mind
to affect the physical body.
>>JOE DISPENZA: In
depression studies
where there is a placebo that's
being tested against the drug,
the research shows that
four out of five people
respond as well to
the placebo as they
do to the drug for depression.
They've done brain
scans on people
before they're given the
placebo or given the drug.
They meet with the doctors.
They take the pill.
Now, the person doesn't
know whether they're
getting the real substance or
they're getting the placebo.
And after a period
of time, the person
notices that they
start to feel better.
When you look at their brain
scans after the end of a study,
you see a significant
change in the way
their brain is functioning.
That means that they are
making their own pharmacy
of antidepressants
by thought alone.
The important point that
I want you to remember
is that every single day
that person took that pill,
it was a reminder of moving
into a new state of being.
Every day they took the pill.
They remembered what the
pill could do for them.
They start to get optimistic.
They start to look
forward to the outcome.
They start to get inspired.
They start to feel grateful,
combining that clear intention
with an elevated emotion,
changing their state of being.
And they do that for
eight weeks in the study.
Now the question is, do
you need the sugar pill,
the saline injection,
or some false surgery
to move into a new
state of being?
Do you need some
external substance
to convince you to move
into a new state of being?
Or can you move into a new state
of being just by thought alone?
And the answer, of course,
is in the meditative process.
We teach people how to change
their state of being when they
get beyond their analytical mind
where they can begin to program
their autonomic
nervous system to make
their own pharmacy of chemicals.
>>FUCHS: I love that.
>>NOORY: You just
talked about meditation.
>>FUCHS: I love how.
I love everything he said.
You know, when they're
testing drugs like a new drug
and they do a test, they
have to filter out something
called the placebo effect.
>>NOORY: Exactly.
>>FUCHS: What the heck is
the placebo effect, George?
>>NOORY: It's tricking the mind.
>>FUCHS: It's mind over matter.
>>NOORY: That's all it is.
>>FUCHS: It's strictly--
instead of filtering it out,
how about if we take
advantage of it?
How about if we
filter out the drugs
and start using
the placebo effect?
Because indeed, not only is
the placebo making you better,
the placebo or the nocebo
is making you sick.
>>NOORY: Right.
You're tricking the mind to
believe it's getting a drug
and it's not.
>>FUCHS: Exactly right.
How does that even work?
Well, obviously, our mind
is controlling everything.
George, it's hidden
in plain sight.
The ability, the
magical ability that we
have to control our realities
and to control our bodies
is so obvious on every level
and has been scientifically
verified so many times
that it staggers the mind
to think about how we are not
leveraging it and employing it
at every split second
that we're awake.
>>NOORY: How often should
we meditate every day?
It doesn't take much--
>>FUCHS: You know how often?
Let me tell you
something, George.
They call it a
meditative practice.
You know why?
Because when you're meditating,
you're practicing for life.
You want to meditate
in your life.
You want your every day,
every second of the day
to be a meditative practice.
And by that I mean
being aware of yourself.
That's what meditation
really is about.
It's being aware that you exist.
It's being aware
that you're thinking.
It's being aware of
how you move your body.
And they call it
mindfulness sometimes.
Meditation's a type
of mindfulness.
Do you know Johns Hopkins
has a curricula that
focuses on mindfulness?
The University-- UCLA Medical--
>>NOORY: It's about time.
>>FUCHS: Yes.
UCLA Medical School,
Yale, Harvard,
they're all using mindfulness
as a way to control the body.
When you start to pay
attention to the body, guess
what happens?
Just like when you pay
attention to your wife,
or just like when you pay
attention to your friend,
or just like when you
pay attention to a dog,
or just like when you pay
attention to anything,
you begin to imbue that thing
with energy and with love
and with a sort
of connection that
allows you to take advantage
of all of the gifts
that that dog, or your wife,
or your friend, or your body
have to offer.
Everything just wants
to be appreciated,
and that's what mindfulness is.
And that's what meditation is,
appreciating you, appreciating
your existence, and
appreciating your life,
and appreciating everything that
it takes to run the body, which
is absolutely awe-inspiring.
>>NOORY: You've been involved
with criticalhealthnews.com
for several years right now.
You have helped countless,
thousands and thousands
of people you, and Doc Wallach,
since you've been doing this.
What would be for you one of
the most satisfying things
that you've come across?
>>FUCHS: Oh, every day.
Just-- matter of fact, this
week I talked to a gal.
When she was young,
she had problems
with her menstrual cycle,
so they took out her organs
at the age of 18.
>>NOORY: They took
out her organs?
>>FUCHS: Her female
organs, I should say.
She had a hysterectomy, a
full-blown hysterectomy.
After that, she started
to have digestive issues.
They had to take
out her gallbladder.
Now they want to do a
liver transplant on her.
Said to her--
>>NOORY: She's falling apart.
>>FUCHS: She's falling apart
because of what they did.
So I said to her, all of this
is coming down to something
that nobody ever
told you you had.
I asked her, did you
have any issues with food
when you were growing up?
Oh, yes, I bloated all the time.
Oh my god.
I was colicky when I was a
baby, et cetera, et cetera.
I said, start
working on your diet.
Start working on your food.
Sent her out some
Beyond Tangy Tangerine.
We started talking.
She just called me,
as a matter of fact,
before I got on the show today.
She got her Beyond
Tangy Tangerine.
She was so excited.
Now, she hasn't appreciated
the physical benefits
of what I did for her.
>>NOORY: She will.
>>FUCHS: But she
appreciated the connection,
the sense that somebody cared.
And so yes, while it's true
that I love supplements,
I love supplementing--
putting people
on supplement programs, dietary
strategies, all of that.
But really, this gives me an
opportunity to love people,
to help people.
And there's no better--
there's no better reward for me.
I get the benefits from it.
George, when you
love somebody, guess
who is getting the
energy of the love?
You are.
Your serotonin's going-- no,
your biochemistry changes.
When you hate
somebody, your bio--
you're the one with a bad heart.
You're the one that gets
the high blood pressure.
You're the one whose immune
system is suppressed.
So when we connect with
people, when we love people,
it's us that benefits.
Not only is there
really nobody out
there, it's all us anyway
in terms of unified field,
but our biochemistry
is connected
to how we relate to the world.
>>NOORY: Ben, thanks for
being on "Beyond Belief."
>>FUCHS: Thank you so much.
>>NOORY: Nothing thrills me
more than when I'm at an event
and somebody comes
up to me and says,
pharmacist Ben Fuchs or Doc
Wallach have saved my life.
It's the world's
greatest feeling.
As Ben would say, it
makes you feel better.
I'm George Noory, and thanks
for watching "Beyond Belief."
[BACKGROUND MUSIC]